h1. Sqwidget

h2. What is it?

*Sqwidget is a jQuery-based widget toolkit*, for the rapid development and deployment of simple or complex multi-platform JavaScript widget applications.

Sqwidget smooths over the complex interactions that take place within the browser, within the pages of an unknown third-party website, on a smartphone, on the desktop or dashboard, while remaining lightweight, non-blocking and based on a jQuery-style plugin architecture.

This allows widget developers to focus their time on the design and functionality of their specific application.


h2. Deployment

Widgets are deployed via a single HTML document, with the same familiar techniques as in normal client-side development (HTML5, CSS3, Ajax, etc). No XML descriptor files are required.

h2. Templating

A widget's HTML file may optionally be templated, by including any number of HTML snippets that represent different views of the application's user interface (e.g. a lightbox, or pop-up). The templates can include simple JavaScript variables, to allow dynamic content that has been sourced, say, from external APIs or offline data storage.


h2. Features & Vision

* Automated jQuery loading, or re-use from the host page
* Simple widget templates
* Plugins, similar to jQuery plugins
* Asynchronous loading
* Non-blocking of resources in the host document
* CSS sandboxing, to shield the widget from CSS in the host page
* Security sandboxing, to shield the host page and widget from potentially malicious scripts
* Support for multiple widgets per page
* Widget instance configuration via HTML5 'data-' attributes in the embed code in the host document


h2. Status of the project

Sqwidget is under rapid development at the moment. An initial release is anticipated around Summer 2010. However, some of the plugins listed below are ready for production. See "the wiki":http://wiki.github.com/premasagar/sqwidget/ for emerging documentation, examples and tutorials.


h2. Plugins and complementary projects

h3. AppleOfMyIframe

"http://github.com/premasagar/appleofmyiframe":http://github.com/premasagar/appleofmyiframe

A jQuery plugin for the creation and manipulation of iframe elements, without the need to load external documents into the iframe. This allows iframe documents and their contents to be manipulated in a similar manner to jQuery's methods for DOM manipulation.

*Status*: Stable. Used in production on the "MiShorts widget":http://www.mishorts.com/widget


h3. CleanSlate

"http://github.com/premasagar/cleanslate":http://github.com/premasagar/cleanslate

CleanSlate sandboxes a widget from CSS in the host page, via the use of a reset stylesheet comprised solely of @!important@ rules. This resets all CSS properties, for all HTML elements, back to sensible defaults.

*Status*: Almost complete (requires small tweaks for IE6 and IE7). Modified from the @!important@-based stylesheet used in the "BBC World Service widget":http://dharmafly.com/bbc-world-service-widget.


h3. Important

"http://github.com/premasagar/important":http://github.com/premasagar/important

JavaScript jQuery plugin to manipulate !important rules for HTML elements in the DOM and inline or external stylesheets.

Combined with CleanSlate, this allows CSS manipulation that is sandboxed from styling in the host document.

*Status*: Stable. Methods for converting external stylesheets still to come.


h3. Nitelite

"http://github.com/premasagar/nitelite":http://github.com/premasagar/nitelite

A low-level "lightbox" plugin, for the display of UI components, overlaid on top of the host web page.

*Status*: Stable. Used in production on the "MiShorts widget":http://www.mishorts.com/widget. Further refinements being worked on.


h3. Sqweeze

"http://github.com/premasagar/sqwidget-builder":http://github.com/premasagar/sqweeze

A command-line Ruby tool for merging and minifying all the HTML, CSS, JavaScript and images used in developing a widget, to produce a single, compressed HTML file. This reduces the number of HTTP requests required to render a widget (potentially to just one request), and reduces the bandwidth transmitted over the wire to the bare minimum.

*Status*: pre-alpha
